sort of a rat-a-tat-tat, you know,
rate and he had a huge memory and he was also the
first professor that I had that was
internationally traveled and had met all of these
heroes of the plant physiology area he had been to
conferences where they were and I remember one
time while I was still a student he went to an
international conference on plant growth
substances came back with pictures of all these
people you know and uh and uh he wanted us to
remember names and to know what different labs
were doing and everything like that so he made it
very personal and uh and of course there were funny
stories about all these uh not all of them but some
of the big stars in the biological area he knew a lot
of those because he traveled around some he was uh
um he was not a what i would call a father figure you
know he wasn't the kind of guy that came around and
put his arm around you and your shoulder and you
know made you feel like he was your grandfather or
her older father or something but when i first met
him he had young children and his wife was
extremely ambitious she was she was always having
some kind of a social function for all of his
students and patting us all on the head and
encouraging us and telling us to find us some of our
friends to work with Dr. Hall and everything so she
he was a hard worker wasn't he he was a hard worker
and uh uh he uh was, you know, I didn't realize it at
the time, but he was very much a visionary in his
sense of what was going on in biology and the way
plants were working. And I remember one time he
telling me something about he thought he worked on
ethylene that proved to be a plant hormone. And I
remember him telling me one time that you know,
that he thought that individual flowers made
ethylene and that they made enough that they could
sense their own ethylene and that this would cause
them, you know, to do certain things. And I
thought, boy, you've got some imagination, you
know. I didn't say that, but I just thought you are,
I just cannot believe that you really think that
that uh that plants could make that much or you know
that they'd make enough that an individual flower
would be able to tell what was you know what it was
supposed to do because of what it made but but that
proved to be just totally correct you know years
later but at that time um We would take, I built some
plastic boxes that were about four feet square and
would fill them full of plants and flow air through
that and collect all of the ethylene from that air
for six hours or something like that and I would
just barely have enough to measure. And, you know,
years later we could measure the ethylene from one
very small flower that it made in 15 or 20 minutes,
you know, with great accuracy. So as the
instrumentation became better, a lot of the
things that he predicted turned out to be true. But
he led me by personal example more than anything
else, not so much by what he said, He read, uh, you
know, extensively. He, uh, uh, was always
thinking about how facts from this lab and another
lab would fit together and would make you
understand something that you couldn't
understand if you didn't bring those two things
together. And, uh, so all of that was, uh, really a
good example for me, and once I got into his lab,
well, uh, you know, that's, that was the beginning
of my scientific. How long did that take after you
started out your graduate? Okay, so, I. A year?
Well, before, I, uh, I finished my master's degree
and then moved in to the PhD program at Wayne Hall.
And I guess for about a year and a half, I was mostly
doing coursework. And within another year, I was
beginning to get data that was totally unheard of
at the time and turned out to be really uh you know a
big thing in plant biology uh and uh and would you
know I did it because Wayne pointed me down this
trail and uh he just brought me one reprint he he
laid it on my desk and he says uh I'd like for you to
figure out what's happening here you know and So he
didn't tell me how to do the experiments or, you
know, what to do or anything. He just said, this is
your baby, you know, you've got to figure this out.
About how many grad, at, at, as the, you began to
work with him, about how many graduate students
did he direct? He probably had three or four other
students at the time and, uh, Not all of them were
working on the same projects and one of them was a
student from Argentina and so he sort of became my
mentor and I learned a lot of techniques from him
and I ended up extending some of the things that he
did on his dissertation. Did Dr. Hall have any
either expressed or just otherwise obvious
guidelines, rules, principles that you graduate
students were to follow?
I don't remember so much about that. He did not have
a set of like I expect you to work so many hours a week
or anything like that. He, uh, um, I remember, I
remember, you know, occasionally he'd tell me
something like, well, I see you up here every
night, I wish so and so was up here or something like
that, you know, so he had some He had a student or two
during that era that was kind of lazy and he would
hint to me that he was glad that I was not like the
lazy one. And you were putting in long hours? Yes,
very long hours. So when you, after your master's
degree, when you went over to start studying with
him, what was your perception at that point of your
goal? What were you, were you thinking about then
being a faculty? research person? I was thinking
about a basic science research career. I had not, I
had not at that time thought so much about
university faculty as maybe maybe somebody like
DuPont or Dow or maybe, maybe USDA basic science
lab or something like that. But I was thinking at
this point about a, a
more experimental science career. And I guess the
thing that, that, caused me to leave ecology which
was what the range management business was all
about was that it was not very quantitative that it
was more subjective and I did not feel comfortable
walking out into a field and saying this is sixty
percent this kind of plant and seven you know
seventeen percent that kind of plant and
everything because I for whatever reason that was
just not my calling. Now did you feel in working
with Dr. Hall that you were kind of on the cutting
edge of where science was heading?
Well, at, I guess at first, I, my first impression
from what some of his students were doing was that
they were, They were making advances in
agricultural technology, but they were not
really doing much for science. But he had this one
student, the Argentinian guy, who was actually
trying to find out how things work. And that was
very interesting to me, and that was really what I
wanted to do. was to understand how things worked.
So once I got started, I, I felt that I was, uh,
actually, uh, making progress at doing that. And I
remember going to a meeting where, uh, somebody,
there was, Hall was involved in several, uh, uh,
feuds i guess you'd say scientific feuds about
theories and so this person hall didn't go to this
particular conference and i was still a graduate
student and this person said well uh you know we
we've just facing all these uh unexplainable
mysteries and uh maybe it's just ethylene that's
you know that's the solution to all of these
unexplained mysteries well everybody there
laughed, you know, that was a big joke and uh, and so
then he said, everybody go around the room and tell
us what you're gonna, what you're doing and uh, you
know, what you're gonna talk about at this meeting
and this was uh, dinner, after dinner the night
before the conference started and it was a small
conference and everybody kind of knew each other
So they finally came around to me, and I said, well,
I'm Paige Morgan. I'm Wayne Hall's graduate
student. I'm working on auxin-induced ethylene
production, and I'm going to explain to you
tomorrow how important it really is. And you've
been talking about it all evening, and actually
what you've said in jest is going to turn out to be
the truth. And the room got as quiet as that had been
making fun of Hall's interest in Athelaine was one
of the USDA leaders in this whole area. Well, at
that point, I felt like that I could stand up on my
feet with these guys and that I knew as much about
some things as they did. I didn't know that I knew
everything, you know. Well, it turned out that You
know, years later, this guy finally had to admit
that we had, you know, really done something
significant with our, with my dissertation
research. Now, Wayne Hall was always modest,
wasn't he? Yes. I can't imagine him ever being
flashy. No, he was the kind of person that would
sort of stay in the background. Did he ever get mad
at anything? Did he ever show anger? I don't ever
remember him doing
that. I know that he was involved in several
personal conflicts
with people here at A&M and other places, but I
never saw him raise his voice or anything like
that. I never heard that either. He always seemed
very mild. So that, in effect, that course that you
were assigned to take as a As an elective. As an
elective. It was a life changing event, wasn't it?
It was. That was,
Dr. Darrow, by saying that you need to know how
plants work in order to put herbicides on them and
kill them, actually changed my whole interest and
that's what led me eventually to become a faculty
member. Alright, getting ready now to kind of
summarize here.
Looking back, what did you learn at A&M that has
been important in your life?
Well, you know, the
The lessons were from the core were personal
responsibility and leadership and doing your
best and honesty and integrity.
All of those were not only just taught in theory,
but we had the opportunity to learn them in
everyday experience. So that was all good. From
the
faculty, I saw a lot of people that were kind and
fair and considerate.
I guess some of the ones that I remember that were
not in my major field were I remember them because
of their human qualities, not so much because of
anything they ever said in a lecture or anything
like that. Are there some of those to whom you feel
particularly grateful to mention? Well, I
remember
Homer Sperry and
Waldrop in range management and Jerry or Gerald
Thomas in range management that became president
of New Mexico State, I believe. They were all
really fine people.
I mentioned Professor Dobson in biology. I don't
know why, but I became acquainted with John
Beckham in chemistry very early. And he always
remembered me, you know, and it was a great
encouragement. I met Robert Skravanek as an Alpha
Zeta student going around getting people signed
my key and knew him all of the years after that. I met
a man in civil engineering. I took a surveying
course and met Mr. Harrington in civil
engineering. I met Mr. Varvel in Walter Varvel in
psychology. He just was such a fine person that I
always remembered him. Did
John Beckham have a nickname? With that deep
voice, I've always thought he would have been a
sitting duck for a nickname, and I never heard one.
Yeah, I don't know whether I had a course from him or
not. See, we knew him well at church. Right. I, you
know, I looked at the catalog and he must have been
just an instructor when I started out here and I,
but he made a good impression on me. There was a man
in math, J.R. Hillman, that I had for calculus as a
beginning graduate student, but he made a good
impression on me. I had an acquaintance in the P.E.
department, Emil Amaliga, who I had two or three
P.E. courses from and I had advice from after that.
and he also taught me a lesson in a negative way, you
know, and that was he died from lung cancer and he
probably got the lung cancer from smoking and so I
picked You know, someplace along, uh, before I got
to be too old, I noticed that people, some people
made bad decisions about their health, you know,
the things that they should have done that would
have made their lives more longer and happier and,
uh, I resolved you know not to make repeat those
kinds of mistakes so he was one of those and there
was a man in some engineering department that I had
his daughter in a bible class and he his name was
Amix and he died suddenly from heart failure at age
like 43 or something like that and that's when I
decided that I was not going to just work and just
have stress and just not, you know, not exercise
and that sort of thing. He was in the petroleum
engineering department. I also knew Dr. Isabel in
chemistry. Texas. Tex Isabel. And I had an early
acquaintanceship with Harry Kunkel and he was a
positive influence. He and I have this Northwest
Texas ranching heritage in common and he was
always a big encouragement.
I had a course from him one time that met on Saturday
like 10 o'clock my senior year in fact on Saturday
morning at 9 or 10 o'clock every Saturday we had a
quiz because he knew no one would be there if he
didn't give that quiz but I you know survived that I
knew R.C. Potts pretty well and he was a good
influence. He's the one that made me realize that I
was not going to be able to make a living on a couple
of hundred acres of northwest Texas land. I got to
know Dr. McAfee pretty well and
I knew George Kunze before he was dean and I met some
of the people in Ag Eco and knew them when I was going
around as an undergraduate with this alpha zeta
key to get it signed and some of those guys were
around for a number of years. And I'd be remiss if I
didn't say that one of the people that really was a
positive influence was Howard Johan, who was also
in the department that Hall was in and stayed there
his whole career and was a good man and a good
influence. He was one of the people that said the
best job in the whole world is a full professor at a
major university. Don't ever discredit, you
know, don't ever think poorly of that. All right,
if you were hired today as a consultant to the A&M
leadership, and you can define leadership
however you want to, what advice would you give
them about what A&M's future should be? What
should A&M be doing or not doing from here on?
Well, it seems to me like that there are a lot of good
things in our past that we don't want to lose and the
big you know, the big fraternity sorority concept
where everybody is judged on their own merit and
not on the color of their skin or how much money
their parents make or this sort of thing. That's
extremely important. We can't continue to be the
university that that,
is different if, if we give up on that. So, so that,
that's important and it, it has to be achieved in
ways in addition to just the Corps of Cadets
obviously. So all of the, all of the things about
student life and the traditions that influence
student life, the positive ones have to be
promoted and extended and the leadership
experiences which have been amplified and spread
out a lot since I was a student, all of the MSC
activities and everything are very important and
I think that, you know, that we're doing things
that we would have never thought of like the summer
abroad and things. When I was a student, no one
would have ever even conceived of that being
something you could do.
All of that, you know, in the context of the
traditions, the commitment to integrity and
responsibility and I guess a while ago I didn't say
hard work, but that was one of the things, you know,
that we took for granted was hard work and that
school was more than just a big party. And I think we
want to, you know, keep those. I think we have a
significant issue between acceptance
of everyone and the
personal values that different people have and
how do you How do you accept everyone without
violating your own personal values? That
continues to be something I think that's a
challenge for the future.
There's merit in both sides of that and I think we
want to find a compromise which will be will
leave us a
place that are producing people that can be
admired and respected and trusted. And
I guess I still see the student as the basic
product. And in my area, the science is the
secondary product. I'm still more proud of my
students that I've trained than the discoveries
that we've made. And I think that both of them are
valuable, though. And I now have a graduate
student that's retiring.
Just this summer. Okay, I've got two more
questions. Okay. If somebody walked up to you and
handed you a check for a million dollars with one
requirement, you must pass it on to A&M, for what
purpose would you want that money used?
If you could make a gift, you get to choose. Yeah, I
think I would put it into some kind of an endowed
professorship. I don't think we have enough. I
think that
when each department has several of those chairs
that they will,
that we can
have the level of
get out of the cycle of always being behind in our
appropriations from the state, you know, and
going through these cycles where our salaries are
not competitive and we're losing this bright star
and that bright star and then we get the salaries
back up and that sort of thing. And I think for the
long run, for the long stable, status of the
university, you need a substantial core of
endowed chairs. Alright, have we left anything
out? I've only got one question left. Have we left
out something, some things you...
No, I've thought about this on several occasions
since we scheduled to do this and I
don't really Oh, well there was one thing I was
going to tell you about and that was that I had the
experience after graduation
while I was in graduate school of having to defend
the decision to add women and to make the corps
optional with a bunch of people at an army reserve
summer camp and I remember they were really angry
and uh and I remember what I told them which it ended
up being the truth you know that that we could stay
where we were and become a non-factor in the
history of Texas and the world or we could take the
good of what we had and go forward with it and become
a great major university and that we were just at
that moment making that decision. And they had no
vision for what A&M has become. And if we had gone
the other route, we would be back where- Sentinel.
Sentinel are some of those- And VMI. Some of those
other very small, very elitist 400, 500 student
institutions, or 2,000 student institutions.
And I have no regrets that we didn't make the right
decision. And I gather that Wayne Hall was one of
the positive? With Cooper, right. With Cooper and
one other person who's, I don't remember. They had
all these sessions and would have these big
discussions with General Rutter. And I gather
that that one that I mentioned a while ago, that
apparently Lyndon said you don't have any choice
about integration. That's already been decided.
You've got to do it, Earl. And I'll back you. John
Connolly will back you. Tiger Teague will back
you. Come on, let's do it. All right, the last
question, then, is what feelings do you carry?